docs/softwaresetup.md, before:

# Software Setup for the Rosie Repository

The instructions below assume you're installing this software on a Raspberry Pi 3 running Debian.
If your hardware or OS is different, be sure to inspect the instructions below to note OS differences, 
which would likely manifest either in the package manager used or the platform architecture (ARM is assumed below).

## Installing InfluxDB

There are no prepackaged binaries for InfluxDB, Telegraf and Grafana that work with ARM-based devices, 
so you'll need to build them yourself.

### Install Node.js and NPM

Raspbian already has node 0.10.29, but not npm. Let's grab a newer version of both.

1. Start with fetching the latest package list from your manager.

  ```
  sudo apt-get update
  ```

2. Install some essential build tools we need, then node and npm

  ```
  sudo apt-get install build-essential
  sudo apt-get install nodejs
  sudo apt-get install npm
  ```

3. Now create a symlink to your new version of node

  ```
  sudo ln -s /usr/bin/nodejs/usr/bin/node
  ```

### Install Go

To build InfluxDB (as well as Telegraf and Grafana), you will need [Go](https://golang.org/).

1. Start by installing bison and the Go Version Manager (gvm)

  ```
  sudo apt-get install bison
  wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/moovweb/gvm/master/binscripts/gvm-installer
  chmod +x gvm-installer
  ./gvm-installer
  ```

  Versions of Go installed will be saved to `~/.gvm/scripts/gvm`.

2. You want Go 1.6, but due to a bug in the 1.6 installer, will need to install version 1.4.3 first.

  ```
  gvm install go1.4.3
  gvm use go1.4.3
  export GOROOT_BOOTSTRAP=$GOROOT
  ```

3. Now, install Go 1.6.2

  ```
  gvm install go1.6.2
  gvm use go1.6.2 --default
  ```

### Install InfluxDB

Now to the good stuff. 

1. Install a couple of additional dependencies before grabbing the Go source.

  ```
  sudo apt-get install ruby-dev
  sudo gem install fpm
  ```

2. Download and build InfluxDB from source

  ```
  go get github.com/influxdata/influxdb
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/influxdata/influxdb/
  ./build.py --package --version=0.13.0 --arch=armhf
  ```

  Setting the `arch` flag to `armhf` is critical for installing InfluxDB on ARM devices like the Pi.

  When you execute the Python build script, you might get a (non-fatal) error message. You can ignore this.

3. Finally, install InfluxDB. Note that the exact name of your `deb` package might differ from the one below. check the `build` directory to get the exact name.

  ```
  sudo dpkg -i build/influxdb_0.13.0~4254ad3_armhf.deb
  ```

4. To see if things worked, run the `influxd` command and then `influx`. You should jump into the InfluxDB cli once the latter command is issued.

Now that InfluxDB is up, lets jump to Telegraf...

## Installing Telegraf

Assuming you installed InfluxDB first, you can jump right ahead to pulling the source down building it with Go. 
If you've not yet installed Go, walk through those instructions in the InfluxDB section first.

1. Grab the telegraf source

  ```
  go get github.com/influxdata/telegraf
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/influxdata/telegraf
  ```

2. Run the `make` command and watch the magic happen

## Installing Grafana

Now that we have InfluxDB and Telegraf set-up, let's get Grafana installed for some world-class dashboards!

1. Start by making sure that you have Node 4 or later installed:

  ```
  wget https://nodejs.org/dist/v4.0.0/node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l.tar.gz
  tar -xvf node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l.tar.gz
  cd node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l
  cp -R * /usr/local
  ```

  As with before, if you've already installed InfluxDB and Telegraf, you should have Go and can grab the source. 
  If you've not yet installed Go, walk through those instructions in the InfluxDB section first.

2. Grab the Grafana source

  ```
  go get github.com/grafana/grafana
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/grafana/grafana
  ```

3. Run the setup script

  ```
  go run build.go setup
  ```

4. Install npm dependencies

  ```
  sudo npm install node-gyp
  sudo npm install -f
  ```

  Make sure to use the `-f` flag to bypass issues with installing PhantomJS on ARM-based systems.

5. Install Grunt

  ```
  sudo npm install -g grunt-cli
  ```

6. To bypass an [issue with PhantomJS](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/2683) (again), you'll need to make a change to the `build.go` file

  ```
  sudo vi build.go
  ```

  Go to line 76 (`:76`) and modify the line to include a `force` flag

  ```javascript
  grunt("--force", release);
  ````

7. Run the build script again. There will be warnings, but it should complete and place a `.deb` file in the `dist` folder

  ```
  go run build.go build pkg-deb
  ```

8. Now install the package. Note that the exact name of your Debian package might be different from mine:

  ```
  sudo dpkg -i dist/grafana_4.0.0-1468683150pre1_armhf.deb
  ```

## Auto-starting services

Once you've installed everything, you'll no-doubt want to set up your services to auto-start on a reboot. 
This will save you time each time you power-cycle your devices. 
What's more, having your services managed by `systemd` will allow you to restart and shut them down without jumping through hoops.

### Auto-starting InfluxDB

After you install InfluxDB, you should have a file called `influxdb.service` in the `/etc/systemd/system` folder on your Pi. 

If this file *does* exist, you simply need to modify the `User` and `Group` settings on line 9 and 10 to the appropriate user and group (aka the user under which you installed InfluxDB).

1. If this file *doesn't* exist, you'll need to create it:

  ```
  cd /etc/systemd/system/
  touch influxdb.service
  vi influxdb.service
  ```

2. Then copy the service file from the [InfluxDB repository here](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb/blob/master/scripts/influxdb.service).

3. Modify the `User` and `Group` settings on line 9 and 10 to the appropriate user and group (aka the user under which you installed InfluxDB).

4. Now reload the systemd daemon and enable InfluxDB:

  ```
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable influxdb
  sudo systemctl start influxdb
```

### Auto-starting Telegraf

Unlike InfluxDB, Telegraf didn't put a `service` file in my `/etc/systemd/system` folder, so I added one myself:

1. Crete the file

  ```
  cd /etc/systemd/system
  touch telegraf.service
  vi telegraf.service
  ```

2. Copy the service file from the [Telegraf repository](https://github.com/influxdata/telegraf/blob/master/scripts/telegraf.service).

3. Change the `user` setting on line 8 to the appropriate user.

4. Determine where telegraf is installed on your system and copy the result.

  ```
  which telegraf
  ```

  For my installation, it was `/home/pi/.gvm/pkgsets/go1.6.2/global/bin/telegraf`

5. Modify the path to the `telegraf` command on line 11 to the correct location of your telegraf installer.

6. Create a `telegraf` directory in `etc/default`

  ```
  sudo touch /etc/default/telegraf
  ```

7. Reload the systemd daemon and enable InfluxDB

  ```
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable telegraf
  sudo systemctl start telegraf
  ```

### Auto-starting Grafana

Auto-starting Grafana is the simpliest of all

```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable grafana-server
sudo sysatemctl start grafana-server
```

Commit message:

added links to Influx, Telegraf and Grafana

docs/softwaresetup.md, after:

# Software Setup for the Rosie Repository

The Rosie Repository relies on three primary software packages to do its work:

- [InfluxDB](https://influxdata.com/time-series-platform/influxdb/)
- [Telegraf](https://influxdata.com/time-series-platform/telegraf/)
- [Grafana](https://influxdata.com/time-series-platform/telegraf/)

The instructions below assume you're installing this software on a Raspberry Pi 3 running Debian.
If your hardware or OS is different, be sure to inspect the instructions below to note OS differences, 
which would likely manifest either in the package manager used or the platform architecture (ARM is assumed below).

## Installing InfluxDB

There are no prepackaged binaries for InfluxDB, Telegraf and Grafana that work with ARM-based devices, 
so you'll need to build them yourself.

### Install Node.js and NPM

Raspbian already has node 0.10.29, but not npm. Let's grab a newer version of both.

1. Start with fetching the latest package list from your manager.

  ```
  sudo apt-get update
  ```

2. Install some essential build tools we need, then node and npm

  ```
  sudo apt-get install build-essential
  sudo apt-get install nodejs
  sudo apt-get install npm
  ```

3. Now create a symlink to your new version of node

  ```
  sudo ln -s /usr/bin/nodejs/usr/bin/node
  ```

### Install Go

To build InfluxDB (as well as Telegraf and Grafana), you will need [Go](https://golang.org/).

1. Start by installing bison and the Go Version Manager (gvm)

  ```
  sudo apt-get install bison
  wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/moovweb/gvm/master/binscripts/gvm-installer
  chmod +x gvm-installer
  ./gvm-installer
  ```

  Versions of Go installed will be saved to `~/.gvm/scripts/gvm`.

2. You want Go 1.6, but due to a bug in the 1.6 installer, will need to install version 1.4.3 first.

  ```
  gvm install go1.4.3
  gvm use go1.4.3
  export GOROOT_BOOTSTRAP=$GOROOT
  ```

3. Now, install Go 1.6.2

  ```
  gvm install go1.6.2
  gvm use go1.6.2 --default
  ```

### Install InfluxDB

Now to the good stuff. 

1. Install a couple of additional dependencies before grabbing the Go source.

  ```
  sudo apt-get install ruby-dev
  sudo gem install fpm
  ```

2. Download and build InfluxDB from source

  ```
  go get github.com/influxdata/influxdb
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/influxdata/influxdb/
  ./build.py --package --version=0.13.0 --arch=armhf
  ```

  Setting the `arch` flag to `armhf` is critical for installing InfluxDB on ARM devices like the Pi.

  When you execute the Python build script, you might get a (non-fatal) error message. You can ignore this.

3. Finally, install InfluxDB. Note that the exact name of your `deb` package might differ from the one below. check the `build` directory to get the exact name.

  ```
  sudo dpkg -i build/influxdb_0.13.0~4254ad3_armhf.deb
  ```

4. To see if things worked, run the `influxd` command and then `influx`. You should jump into the InfluxDB cli once the latter command is issued.

Now that InfluxDB is up, lets jump to Telegraf...

## Installing Telegraf

Assuming you installed InfluxDB first, you can jump right ahead to pulling the source down building it with Go. 
If you've not yet installed Go, walk through those instructions in the InfluxDB section first.

1. Grab the telegraf source

  ```
  go get github.com/influxdata/telegraf
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/influxdata/telegraf
  ```

2. Run the `make` command and watch the magic happen

## Installing Grafana

Now that we have InfluxDB and Telegraf set-up, let's get Grafana installed for some world-class dashboards!

1. Start by making sure that you have Node 4 or later installed:

  ```
  wget https://nodejs.org/dist/v4.0.0/node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l.tar.gz
  tar -xvf node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l.tar.gz
  cd node-v4.0.0-linux-armv7l
  cp -R * /usr/local
  ```

  As with before, if you've already installed InfluxDB and Telegraf, you should have Go and can grab the source. 
  If you've not yet installed Go, walk through those instructions in the InfluxDB section first.

2. Grab the Grafana source

  ```
  go get github.com/grafana/grafana
  cd $GOPATH/src/github.com/grafana/grafana
  ```

3. Run the setup script

  ```
  go run build.go setup
  ```

4. Install npm dependencies

  ```
  sudo npm install node-gyp
  sudo npm install -f
  ```

  Make sure to use the `-f` flag to bypass issues with installing PhantomJS on ARM-based systems.

5. Install Grunt

  ```
  sudo npm install -g grunt-cli
  ```

6. To bypass an [issue with PhantomJS](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/2683) (again), you'll need to make a change to the `build.go` file

  ```
  sudo vi build.go
  ```

  Go to line 76 (`:76`) and modify the line to include a `force` flag

  ```javascript
  grunt("--force", release);
  ````

7. Run the build script again. There will be warnings, but it should complete and place a `.deb` file in the `dist` folder

  ```
  go run build.go build pkg-deb
  ```

8. Now install the package. Note that the exact name of your Debian package might be different from mine:

  ```
  sudo dpkg -i dist/grafana_4.0.0-1468683150pre1_armhf.deb
  ```

## Auto-starting services

Once you've installed everything, you'll no-doubt want to set up your services to auto-start on a reboot. 
This will save you time each time you power-cycle your devices. 
What's more, having your services managed by `systemd` will allow you to restart and shut them down without jumping through hoops.

### Auto-starting InfluxDB

After you install InfluxDB, you should have a file called `influxdb.service` in the `/etc/systemd/system` folder on your Pi. 

If this file *does* exist, you simply need to modify the `User` and `Group` settings on line 9 and 10 to the appropriate user and group (aka the user under which you installed InfluxDB).

1. If this file *doesn't* exist, you'll need to create it:

  ```
  cd /etc/systemd/system/
  touch influxdb.service
  vi influxdb.service
  ```

2. Then copy the service file from the [InfluxDB repository here](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb/blob/master/scripts/influxdb.service).

3. Modify the `User` and `Group` settings on line 9 and 10 to the appropriate user and group (aka the user under which you installed InfluxDB).

4. Now reload the systemd daemon and enable InfluxDB:

  ```
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable influxdb
  sudo systemctl start influxdb
```

### Auto-starting Telegraf

Unlike InfluxDB, Telegraf didn't put a `service` file in my `/etc/systemd/system` folder, so I added one myself:

1. Crete the file

  ```
  cd /etc/systemd/system
  touch telegraf.service
  vi telegraf.service
  ```

2. Copy the service file from the [Telegraf repository](https://github.com/influxdata/telegraf/blob/master/scripts/telegraf.service).

3. Change the `user` setting on line 8 to the appropriate user.

4. Determine where telegraf is installed on your system and copy the result.

  ```
  which telegraf
  ```

  For my installation, it was `/home/pi/.gvm/pkgsets/go1.6.2/global/bin/telegraf`

5. Modify the path to the `telegraf` command on line 11 to the correct location of your telegraf installer.

6. Create a `telegraf` directory in `etc/default`

  ```
  sudo touch /etc/default/telegraf
  ```

7. Reload the systemd daemon and enable InfluxDB

  ```
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable telegraf
  sudo systemctl start telegraf
  ```

### Auto-starting Grafana

Auto-starting Grafana is the simpliest of all

```
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable grafana-server
sudo sysatemctl start grafana-server
```
